202111071051

Status: ✔

 Tags:

# [[Introduction]]

For centuries, in the Himalayan mountain ranges, local cultures have believed that glaciers are alive. And what’s more, that certain glaciers can have different genders including male and female. These people ‘breed’ new glaciers by grafting together—or marrying—fragments of ice from male and female glaciers, then covering them with charcoal, wheat husks, cloths, or willow branches so they can reproduce in privacy. These glacierets transform into fully active glaciers that grow each year with additional snowfall. Those then serve as lasting reserves of water that farmers can use to irrigate their crops. Over the years, these practices have inspired other cultures, where people are creating their own artificial ice reservoirs(AIRs) and applying them to solve serious modern challenges around water supplies.

Take Ladakh, a high-altitude desert region in northern India. It sits in the rain shadow of the Himalayas and receives on average fewer than ten centimeters of rain/snow per year. As local glaciers shrink because of climate change, regional water scarcity is increasing. _And so, local farmers have started growing their own ice reservoirs as insurance against this uncertainty._ 

In just the last 3 winters, more than 500 farmers built around 50 icestupas storing more than 120 million litres in 26 villages of this region. And what’s more, they did not receive any training, money or materials to do this. This shows how cheap and easy Icestupas are to build. 

A typical Icestupa just requires a fountain nozzle mounted on a supply pipeline. The water source is usually a high altitude lake or glacial stream. Due to the altitude difference between the pipeline input and fountain output, water ejects from the fountain nozzle as droplets that eventually lose their energy and accumulate as ice.  The fountain is manually activated during the winter nights and is raised, through addition of metal pipes, when significant ice accumulates below.

Constructing ice reservoirs is not new, in the past these were built as ice sheets much higher up the mountains, making them difficult to manage. Now, as ice cones, they are built next to where the water is needed most, right on the outskirts of villages, near their fields. So the shape was the key innovation that made them particularly inexpensive and easy to maintain.

Together with HIAL, I have been helping these farmers construct Icestupas for the last 6 years. But, still, any time we build an Icestupa at a new location, we never know what to expect. Will this Icestupa grow big enough to break our old records or will it not even last the heat of the next day? 

I often questioned myself whether Icestupas are a good way to achieve winter water storage. Watching the icestupa freezing in the winter, I wondered whether all the water we sprayed was freezing or just ending up in a puddle somewhere. Watching the icestupa melting under the summer sun, I wondered how much of the water we stored was just evaporating back into the atmosphere.  Moreover, it was not immediately clear how the shape of the icestupas slowed down melting. Yes, ice cones have lesser surface area compared to ice sheets but why does that favour freezing over melting? 

These were the questions I brought with me later when I started my PhD.

At UniFR, we designed an Icestupa measurement campaign using flowmeters, weather stations and drones. Just last winter, we built and measured Icestupas simultaneously in Ladakh and Switzerland.

We observed a stark difference in the growth rates of the two Icestupas. The Indian Icestupa reached volumes roughly 8 times more than the Swiss Icestupa. 

Sublimation and evaporation losses were negligible but the corresponding energy losses were quite significant. It was because of freezing energy generated by sublimation, the Indian Icestupa was able to grow much bigger and last longer compared to the Swiss Icestupa. But both Icestupas suffered high water losses, around 80 percent of their fountain water input mainly due to excess fountain spray.

Icestupas are now grown worldwide. Last winter, teams from Chile, Kyrgyzstan and Nepal constructed them. These findings will help us increase the water storage efficiency of existing construction locations and also identify other location that are suitable to use this new technology to achieve winter water storage.

---
# References

- [[Glacier grafting]]

- [[Ladakh weather]]

- [[Ice Stupa Competition]]

- [[Construction process]]

- [[Ice cone vs ice sheet]]

- [[Icestupa experience]]

- [[Sublimation effect]]

- [[Day melt effect]]

- [[Clouds effect]]

- [[Discharge optimization]]